# Machine Learning with Association Rule Learning
Association rules are if-then statements that convey the relationships between
variables or items in a database, it has two parts, an antecedent and a
consequent. An antecedent is an item found in the data, and the consequent is
what the antecedent relates to. For example, it has been found it is very
likely that a shopper who purchases bread would also purchase peanut butter
along side.

\begin{equation}
    \text{bread} \Longrightarrow \text{peanut-butter}
\end{equation}

Association Rule Learning is a data mining technique, arised from the data
mining community in search for associations, patterns, correlations or casual
structures between varaibles in large databases. It seeks to discover
association rules by using measures of interestingness between items in the
database, it is also used in the knowledge discovery process to filter, select
or guide a data mining process to yield interesting rules.

Any system be it biological, physical or computational, often have large number
of different parameters and configurations that determine its performance and
run time behaviour. Computer scientists spend a large amount of time tuning
machine learning systems to perform optimally, such as Genetic Algorithms (GA).
With a GAs there are six main parameters to configure, namely the population
size, selection method, crossover and mutation probabilities, and crossover and
mutation methods, and more...

With the amount of options available, it can be a daunting task for the user to
choose the optimal configurations. Maybe one can mitigate the configuration
problem by monitoring the GA's population at each generation interval, and
configure the GA as required?

Food for thought ...
